
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                    B. Campbell, Ed.
Request for Comments: 8707                                        Ping Identity
Category: Standards Track                                        J. Bradley
ISSN: 2070-1721                                              Yubico/Ping Identity
                                                            H. Tschofenig
                                                                 Arm Limited
                                                           February 2020


       Resource Indicators for OAuth 2.0

Abstract

   This document specifies an extension to the OAuth 2.0 Authorization
   Framework defining request parameters that allow a client to indicate
   the target service or resource to which access is being requested.
   An authorization server's response also provides this information.

   An access token is typically scoped for use at a particular resource
   server.  The resource indicators allow the client to identify the
   target service of the access token and also provide a way for the
   resource server to identify the intended audience for the token.

Status of This Memo

   This is an Internet Standards Track document.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Resource Indicators
     2.1.  The "resource" Request Parameter
     2.2.  The "invalid_target" Error Code
     2.3.  Authorization Request
     2.4.  Token Request
     2.5.  Authorization Server Processing
     2.6.  Access Token Response
   3.  Interaction with Token Introspection
   4.  Relationship to the "aud" Claim
   5.  Resource Server Processing
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  IANA Considerations
     7.1.  OAuth Parameters Registration
     7.2.  OAuth URI Registration
     7.3.  OAuth Extensions Error Registration
   8.  References
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements
   Appendix B.  Document Notes

1.  Introduction

   OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749] does not have a standard mechanism for a client to
   indicate the target resource or service (hereinafter "resource") for
   which an access token is requested.  This document specifies
   parameters that enable such an indication.

   Resource indicators enable a client to request a token for a specific
   resource and allow the authorization server to bind the issued token
   to that resource.  The audience of an access token is represented by
   the "aud" claim, as defined for JSON Web Token (JWT) [RFC7519].

2.  Resource Indicators

2.1.  The "resource" Request Parameter

   A resource indicator is an absolute URI that identifies the resource.
   The value MUST be an absolute URI and MUST NOT include a fragment
   component.  The URI SHOULD NOT contain a query component unless the
   resource owner's client requires it.  The URI is used as a logical
   identifier for the resource and is not necessarily a network
   locatable address; however, it MUST use the "https" URI scheme unless
   a different scheme is necessary for the application.  The resource
   indicator's URI serves as a name for the target resource.

   The "resource" parameter MAY be included in requests to the
   authorization endpoint (Section 2.3) and to the token endpoint
   (Section 2.4).  It MAY also be used in access token introspection
   responses (Section 3).

   Multiple instances of the "resource" parameter MAY be sent to the
   authorization server.  Each instance represents a different resource
   for which access is being requested.

2.2.  The "invalid_target" Error Code

   This document defines the "invalid_target" error code, which indicates
   that the requested resource indicator is invalid, unknown, or
   malformed.

   The authorization server responds with the HTTP 400 (Bad Request)
   status code when this error is encountered at the token endpoint.  At
   the authorization endpoint, the error is returned to the client per
   the error response mechanisms of Section 4.1.2 of [RFC6749].

2.3.  Authorization Request

   The client MAY use the "resource" parameter to indicate the target
   resource(s) when directing the resource owner to the authorization
   endpoint.

   The following example shows an authorization request containing a
   resource indicator:

   GET /as/authorization.oauth2?response_type=code
      &client_id=example-client
      &redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Fcb
      &scope=openid
      &state=XZ4icq
      &resource=https%3A%2F%2Frs.example.com%2Fapi HTTP/1.1

   The authorization server SHOULD validate the resource indicator and
   MAY require that the resource indicator be registered for the client.

2.4.  Token Request

   The client SHOULD include the "resource" parameter at the token
   endpoint.  When the authorization request included one or more
   resource indicators, the client MUST include at least one of them at
   the token endpoint; the authorization server SHALL ignore any
   resource indicators presented at the token endpoint that were not
   also presented at the authorization endpoint.  The authorization
   server MAY grant a subset of the requested resources.

   The following example shows an access token request with a resource
   indicator:

   POST /token.oauth2 HTTP/1.1
   Host: as.example.com
   Authorization: Basic czZCaGRSa3F0Mzo3RmpmcDBaQnIxS3REUmJuZlZkbUl3

   grant_type=authorization_code
   &redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Fcb
   &code=10escu2e
   &resource=https%3A%2F%2Frs.example.com%2Fapi

2.5.  Authorization Server Processing

   The authorization server validates the resource indicators presented
   in authorization and token requests.  Indicators that are malformed,
   unknown, or not allowed for the client result in an "invalid_target"
   error.

   The authorization server binds the accepted resource indicators to
   the authorization code or access token it issues, so that they can be
   carried across the authorization code exchange and into token
   introspection.

2.6.  Access Token Response

   The access token response does not include the resource indicators as
   a separate parameter; the audience information is encoded in the
   access token itself (e.g. as an "aud" claim in a JWT) or otherwise
   associated with the token by the authorization server.

3.  Interaction with Token Introspection

   An authorization server that supports token introspection [RFC7662]
   SHOULD include the "aud" claim in its introspection response for
   tokens that were issued with resource indicators.  The "aud" claim
   value is either a single string or an array of strings, each an
   absolute URI identifying a resource server for which the token is
   valid:

   {
     "active": true,
     "client_id": "example-client",
     "username": "alice",
     "scope": "read",
     "aud": "https://rs.example.com/api",
     "exp": 1563601090
   }

4.  Relationship to the "aud" Claim

   The resource indicators accepted by the authorization server are used
   as the value of the "aud" claim (Section 4.1.3 of [RFC7519]) when an
   access token is a JWT.  The "aud" claim identifies the recipients
   that the JWT is intended for.

5.  Resource Server Processing

   A resource server that receives an access token SHOULD verify that the
   token's audience (e.g. the "aud" claim of a JWT, or the "aud" claim of
   an introspection response) contains an identifier that identifies the
   resource server.  A token presented to a resource server whose
   identifier is not in the token's audience MUST be rejected.  Such
   validation reduces the potential impact of token replay across
   resource servers.

6.  Security Considerations

   The resource indicator constrains where an access token may be used
   and limits the impact of token leakage.  Authorization servers SHOULD
   ensure that resource indicators are bound to tokens in a way that
   cannot be tampered with.  Resource indicators SHOULD use the "https"
   scheme to prevent ambiguity and spoofing.  Clients MUST be prevented
   from obtaining tokens for resource servers they have not been
   registered to use.

7.  IANA Considerations

7.1.  OAuth Parameters Registration

   IANA has registered the following value in the "OAuth Parameters"
   registry:

      Name: resource
      Parameter Usage Location: authorization request, token request
      Change Controller: IETF
      Reference: RFC 8707

7.2.  OAuth Extensions Error Registration

   IANA has registered the following value in the "OAuth Extensions
   Error" registry:

      Error: invalid_target
      Usage Location: authorization response, token response
      Related Document: RFC 8707

8.  References

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., Ed., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework",
              RFC 6749, DOI 10.17487/RFC6749, October 2012.
   [RFC7519]  Jones, M., Bradley, J., and N. Sakimura, "JSON Web Token
              (JWT)", RFC 7519, DOI 10.17487/RFC7519, May 2015.
   [RFC7662]  Richer, J., Ed., "OAuth 2.0 Token Introspection",
              RFC 7662, DOI 10.17487/RFC7662, October 2015.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   The authors thank the OAuth working group participants, including
   Aaron Parecki, Torsten Lodderstedt, and many others, for their review
   and contributions.
